adventures/conversions/the-stygian-library.md, before:

---
layout: default
parent: Conversions
grand_parent: Adventures
title: The Stygian Library
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# The Stygian Library

- Based on the [The Stygian Library](https://www.exaltedfuneral.com/products/aberrant-reflections-pdfhttps://usa.soulmuppet-store.co.uk/products/the-stygian-library) by [Emmy 'Cavegirl' Allen](http://cavegirlgames.blogspot.com/).
- Conversion by [Pat Eyler](https://footofthemountainadventures.blogspot.com)


## General Notes
- This conversion is based on The Stygian Library: Remastered

## Locations

### Boiler Room
Boiler 
- 0 HP, 2 Armor, 20 STR
- If the boiler takes **Critical Damage** it bursts, dealing d12+d12 *blast* damage.

### Chained Lectern

Furious Book 

- 6 HP, 1 Armor, 10 STR, Slam (d6)
- Anyone reading the book takes 1 damage per turn of reading. 
- If unfastened from the lectern, it can fly.
- It is immune to poison, cold, and effects that only affect living things.
- Fire does *enhanced* damage.
- **Critical Damage:** drains 1 point of WIL

### Furnace

Furnace 

- Opening the doors does d6 damage to anyone directly in front of it.
- Entering the furnace does d12+d12 damage.

### Infernal Gateway

Minor Devil 

- 7-12 HP, 2 Armor, 13-18 STR, claws of various weapons (d8+d8)
- Takes *impaired* damage from weapons that are not Holy, Magical, or Silver.
- Takes *enhanced* damage from Holy weapons.
- Immune to mind control that doesn't specifically target infernal beings.
- Special ability 6: Drain a memory by touch - does d12 damage to WIL

### Ossuary

Bone Beast

- 9 HP, 1 Armor, 12 STR, batter (d6 *blast*) *detachment*
- Physical attacks against it are *impaired*, blast attacks are *enhanced*.

### Paper Beehive 

Effects of eating Black Honey 

3) -2 STR, permanently

5. Stinger does d12+d12 damage to both attacker and target

8. +1 Armor, permanently

Bee

- 3 HP, 1 Armor, 3 STR, sting (d8 to bee and victim)

Queen Bee

- 7 HP, 1 Armor, 12 STR, sting (d8+d6 to queen and victim)

### Planetarium

The Orrery

- Make a WIL save, on success may as a single yes-or-no question about a cast horoscope and get an accurate answer.

### Spider Trapdoor

Trapdoor Spider 

- 7 HP, 2 Armor, 16 STR, sting (d10)
- 3-in-6 chance to make no noise at all when it does something.
- **Critical Damage:** victim is paralyzed for 1 turn.

### Steam Vents

Valve

- If the valve is opened, everyone in the room will take d6 damage.

## Details

### Gas Lamps

Gas pipes 

- If the gas is let out in a room, it will explode for d10+d8 *blast* damage to everyone present.

### Haunted

What the Haunting can do 

1. Thrown objects to d6 damage.

4. WIL save or memories are subtly altered. If the victim makes their save, they are aware of the attempt.

5. DEX save or take flame damage

10. make a vermin swarm appear:

    4 HP, 6 STR, 12 DEX, 11 WIL, bite (d3) _detachment_

    - Afraid of fire

12. Falling objects do D6 damage.

### Morbid

Death is a constant presence here 

- Increase any damage taken here by 1 point.
- Anyone sleeping here heals any lost STR.

### Negligible Gravity

Effects of low gravity 

- Missile attacks are *impaired*.

### Silent

Trying to cast spells 

- The caster must make a STR save to yell loudly enough to cast the spell. If they fail, they take 1 point damage by damaging their vocal cords.

### Staircase

Falling 

- Anything falling down the stairs takes d6 damage for each 20' fallen.
- If someone is pushed down the stairs, they make a DEX save or fall.

### Turning Gears

Getting caught in the gears

- Sticking a body part into the gears does d8+d8 damage.
- If someone is pushed into the gears, they make a Dex save or take d8+d8 damage.

## Monsters

### Monster 1

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### Mummified Stage

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### Neurovore

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### 

## 

```

```

Commit message:

Starting on Monsters
Added Animated Book and Animate Spell.

adventures/conversions/the-stygian-library.md, after:

---
layout: default
parent: Conversions
grand_parent: Adventures
title: The Stygian Library
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# The Stygian Library

- Based on the [The Stygian Library](https://www.exaltedfuneral.com/products/aberrant-reflections-pdfhttps://usa.soulmuppet-store.co.uk/products/the-stygian-library) by [Emmy 'Cavegirl' Allen](http://cavegirlgames.blogspot.com/).
- Conversion by [Pat Eyler](https://footofthemountainadventures.blogspot.com)


## General Notes
- This conversion is based on The Stygian Library: Remastered

## Locations

### Boiler Room
Boiler 
- 0 HP, 2 Armor, 20 STR
- If the boiler takes **Critical Damage** it bursts, dealing d12+d12 *blast* damage.

### Chained Lectern

Furious Book 

- 6 HP, 1 Armor, 10 STR, Slam (d6)
- Anyone reading the book takes 1 damage per turn of reading. 
- If unfastened from the lectern, it can fly.
- It is immune to poison, cold, and effects that only affect living things.
- Fire does *enhanced* damage.
- **Critical Damage:** drains 1 point of WIL

### Furnace

Furnace 

- Opening the doors does d6 damage to anyone directly in front of it.
- Entering the furnace does d12+d12 damage.

### Infernal Gateway

Minor Devil 

- 7-12 HP, 2 Armor, 13-18 STR, claws of various weapons (d8+d8)
- Takes *impaired* damage from weapons that are not Holy, Magical, or Silver.
- Takes *enhanced* damage from Holy weapons.
- Immune to mind control that doesn't specifically target infernal beings.
- Special ability 6: Drain a memory by touch - does d12 damage to WIL

### Ossuary

Bone Beast

- 9 HP, 1 Armor, 12 STR, batter (d6 *blast*) *detachment*
- Physical attacks against it are *impaired*, blast attacks are *enhanced*.

### Paper Beehive 

Effects of eating Black Honey 

3) -2 STR, permanently

5. Stinger does d12+d12 damage to both attacker and target

8. +1 Armor, permanently

Bee

- 3 HP, 1 Armor, 3 STR, sting (d8 to bee and victim)

Queen Bee

- 7 HP, 1 Armor, 12 STR, sting (d8+d6 to queen and victim)

### Planetarium

The Orrery

- Make a WIL save, on success may as a single yes-or-no question about a cast horoscope and get an accurate answer.

### Spider Trapdoor

Trapdoor Spider 

- 7 HP, 2 Armor, 16 STR, sting (d10)
- 3-in-6 chance to make no noise at all when it does something.
- **Critical Damage:** victim is paralyzed for 1 turn.

### Steam Vents

Valve

- If the valve is opened, everyone in the room will take d6 damage.

## Details

### Gas Lamps

Gas pipes 

- If the gas is let out in a room, it will explode for d10+d8 *blast* damage to everyone present.

### Haunted

What the Haunting can do 

1. Thrown objects to d6 damage.

4. WIL save or memories are subtly altered. If the victim makes their save, they are aware of the attempt.

5. DEX save or take flame damage

10. make a vermin swarm appear:

    4 HP, 6 STR, 12 DEX, 11 WIL, bite (d3) _detachment_

    - Afraid of fire

12. Falling objects do D6 damage.

### Morbid

Death is a constant presence here 

- Increase any damage taken here by 1 point.
- Anyone sleeping here heals any lost STR.

### Negligible Gravity

Effects of low gravity 

- Missile attacks are *impaired*.

### Silent

Trying to cast spells 

- The caster must make a STR save to yell loudly enough to cast the spell. If they fail, they take 1 point damage by damaging their vocal cords.

### Staircase

Falling 

- Anything falling down the stairs takes d6 damage for each 20' fallen.
- If someone is pushed down the stairs, they make a DEX save or fall.

### Turning Gears

Getting caught in the gears

- Sticking a body part into the gears does d8+d8 damage.
- If someone is pushed into the gears, they make a Dex save or take d8+d8 damage.

## Monsters

### Animated Book

6 HP, 1 Armor, 8 STR, 8 DEX, 9 WIL 

- It can fly.
- It is immune to poison, cold, and effects that only affect living things.
- Fire does *enhanced* damage.
- **Critical Damage:** drains 1 point of WIL

### Animate Spell

3 HP, 6 STR, 6 DEX, 10 WIL *spell casting* 

- The spell's personality and powers depend on the nature of the spell
- Immune to physical damage of the same type as the spell.
- Controls the effects of any spells cast which have the same type/function.
- Magical weapons do *diminished* damage to animate spells, normal weapons do no damage.
- No physical attacks, but can cast itself once per round. 
- If reduced to 0 STR, 0 WIL, or takes **critical damage**, becomes a normal spell book.

### Monster 1

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### Monster 1

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### 

### Mummified Sage

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### Neurovore

Stats 

- Notes
- **Critical Damage:**

### 

## 

```

```
