README.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Home
nav_order: 1
permalink: /
---

Cairn is an [adventure game](http://questingblog.com/adventure-game-vs-osr) about exploring a dark & mysterious Wood filled with strange folk, hidden treasure, and unspeakable monstrosities. Character generation is quick and random, classless, and relies on fictional advancement rather than through XP or level mechanics. It is based on [Knave](https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/250888/Knave) by Ben Milton and [Into The Odd](https://chrismcdee.itch.io/electric-bastionland) by Chris McDowall. The game was written by [Yochai Gal](https://newschoolrevolution.com).

The PDF version is available for free on [Itch.io](https://yochaigal.itch.io/cairn) & [DriveThruRPG](https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/330809/Cairn).  
The full text is licensed under [CC-BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).  
The original Affinity Publisher file is also available with the downloads.

<p></p>

[![Alt text](/img/cairn.svg "Click to embiggen"){:height="50%" width="50%"}](/img/cairn.svg)

Commit message:

Getting started with contributing page

README.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Home
nav_order: 1
permalink: /
---

Cairn is an [adventure game](http://questingblog.com/adventure-game-vs-osr) about exploring a dark & mysterious Wood filled with strange folk, hidden treasure, and unspeakable monstrosities. Character generation is quick and random, classless, and relies on fictional advancement rather than through XP or level mechanics. It is based on [Knave](https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/250888/Knave) by Ben Milton and [Into The Odd](https://chrismcdee.itch.io/electric-bastionland) by Chris McDowall. The game was written by [Yochai Gal](https://newschoolrevolution.com).

The PDF version is available for free on [Itch.io](https://yochaigal.itch.io/cairn) & [DriveThruRPG](https://www.drivethrurpg.com/product/330809/Cairn).  
The full text is licensed under [CC-BY-SA 4.0](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/).  
The original Affinity Publisher file is also available with the downloads.

This is a game that values community contributions. If you would like to get familiar with adding to the website, see [Starting to Contribute](./contributing).

<p></p>

[![Alt text](/img/cairn.svg "Click to embiggen"){:height="50%" width="50%"}](/img/cairn.svg)
