wip/2e/example-setting.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Example Setting
grand_parent: WIP
parent: 2e
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# Example Setting

## Theme
- Low-magic (magic is known but rarely understood).
- Technology is 13th or 14th century (gunpowder, longbows, some agricultural innovations, pre-printing press).
- Religion exists, but is murky and unprovable. Deities do not necessarily walk the lands, though some believe they do.
- PCs are Human-only, and are neutral towards the centers of power.
- Names & proper nouns are largely plain English. Themes are inspired by the British Isles, Germany, and Eastern Europe.

## Domain Scale
- **Small**: One **Province** under a single ruler (**The Potentate**).

### Terrain
The results of the die rolls are below. Items  in **bold** represent the chosen terrain.

#### Hub
1. **Oasis**
2. **Forests**
3. **Cliffs**
4. **Cliffs**
5. **Beaches**
6. **Sea**
7. **Hills**
8. **Sea**
9. **Swamp**
10. **Wasteland**
11. **Caverns**

## Details
### Details Table Results
1. (Central hub) **Stronghold**: Seat of government
2. **Special**: Unusual gravity
3. **Hazard**: Permanent fog
4. **Ruins**: Abandoned settlement
5. **Landmark**: Glimmering cave 
6. **Special**: Trash heap
7. **Lair**: Faction hideout
8. **Settlement**: Prison, factionally divided
9. **Special**: Home of the folk witches
10. **Lair**: Faction hideout
11. **Lair**: Hidden burrow

### Names
1. **Hope Landing**
2. **The Drifting Wood**
3. **The Murk**
4. **Dead Margin**
5. **Swift Mines**
6. **Slag Harbor**
7. **Lord's Blanket**
8. **Whisperbox Isle**
9. **Hexmire**
10. **Fria's Promise**
11. **The Skunkholes**

## Province: Whitefort
**Whitefort**, after its "founding" by the great ancestor of the **Earl of White**. The (now dead) locals referred to it as **The Ramparts**, but that name is long forgotten. **Hope Landing** (built around a large font of water in an otherwise brackish land) acted as a regional hub for future explorers and pioneers, but they became stymied by the wastelands to the West, and eventually settled closer to the capital city. The current ruling Faction (The **Potentate**) makes the city its center of government, while **The Will** hides in the abandoned town of **Dead Margin** on the cliffs to the Southwest.

## Factions

### The Potentate (Government)
#### Resources
- **Homebase**: **Hope's Landing**. 
- **Anonymity**: The ruling council speaks only through an anointed subject, **The Whisper**.  
- **Knowledge**: There is little the **Potentate**'s ubiquitous spies do not know.   
- **Authority**: As the ruling faction over the **Province**, _detachments_ of soldiers can be summoned from the villages very quickly.
- **Seneschals**: **The Whisper**, stats as [banshee](/resources/monsters/banshee/), and **Lord Alexey**, stas as [buccaneer](/resources/monsters/buccaneer/).
- **Agenda**: Maintain the stability of the realm by crushing rising threats from other factions. 
  - Deploy newly-garrisoned troops to all roads leading into the Capital, to uncover enemies of the realm through torture and force. 
  - Crush the **The Will** and any other enemies threatening the realm. 

### Earl of White (Noble)
#### Resources
- **Homebase**: **Hope's Landing**. 
- **Fealty** of the plains villages and their farms (as detachment, stats as [Bandits](/resources/monsters/bandit/)).
- **Property**: The **White** family has control of significant food stores.
- **Seneschal**: Personal Chamberlain, stats as [Brigand](/resources/monsters/brigand/).
- **Agenda**: Increase his own wealth by eliminating this greatest competitor: **Lord Alexy**. 
  - Promise this season's crop-yield to the **Under-folk**. In exchange they will raid nearby villages.
  - Bait & assassinate **Lord Alexey**, whose family owns the **Swift Mines**.   
  - Marry the widow **Alexey** and inherit the mines, or buy them at a steep discount.

### The Under-folk (Commoner)
#### Resources
- **Homebase**: The caverns at **The Skunkholes**.
- **Population**: 2d10+10 ratlike **Under-folk**, stats as [Kobold](/resources/monsters/kobold/).
- **Apparatus**: The **God-thumb**, which provides warmth and safety for the colony. 
- **Seneschal**: **Ka-ro**, stats as [Ettin](/resources/monsters/ettin/).
- **Agenda**: Protect the **God-thumb** at all costs, and find new sources of food for the coming winter. 
  - Ally with the **Earl of White** for his food stores, so long as it is convenient.
  - Find an independent food store that they may control.

### The Will (Arcane)
#### Resources
- **Homebase**: **Dead Margin** (see below). Remnants in **Fria's Promise**.
- **Population**: 2d10+10 [Acolytes](/resources/monsters/acolyte).
- **Position**: **The Springhouse**, an abandoned keep in **Dead Margin**, once used by ancestors of the **Earl of White** to imprison and torture their political enemies. It is well-fortified and contains a small complex of jails beneath it. 
- **Seneschal**: **Arjen Vol Sonn**, stats as [Lich](/resources/monsters/lich/).
- **Agenda**: Acquire the **God-thumb**, and use it to restore **Fria The Empty**, then rule the **Provinces**.
  - Send spies throughout the **Provinces** in search of the **God-thumb**. Steal it. 
  - Command the **Under-folk** to overwhelm the capital and distract the **Potentate**.
  - Take the **God-thumb** to **Hexmire** and bathe it in the **Font of Regret**.  
 
## Map Result
[![Alt text](/img/2e/example-setting-2.png "Click to embiggen"){:height="40%" width="40%"}](/img/2e/example-setting-2.png)

Commit message:

changed central hub to heart

wip/2e/example-setting.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Example Setting
grand_parent: WIP
parent: 2e
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# Example Setting

## Theme
- Low-magic (magic is known but rarely understood).
- Technology is 13th or 14th century (gunpowder, longbows, some agricultural innovations, pre-printing press).
- Religion exists, but is murky and unprovable. Deities do not necessarily walk the lands, though some believe they do.
- PCs are Human-only, and are neutral towards the centers of power.
- Names & proper nouns are largely plain English. Themes are inspired by the British Isles, Germany, and Eastern Europe.

## Domain Scale
- **Small**: One **Province** under a single ruler (**The Potentate**).

### Terrain
The results of the die rolls are below. Items  in **bold** represent the chosen terrain.

#### Hub
1. **Oasis**
2. **Forests**
3. **Cliffs**
4. **Cliffs**
5. **Beaches**
6. **Sea**
7. **Hills**
8. **Sea**
9. **Swamp**
10. **Wasteland**
11. **Caverns**

## Details
### Details Table Results
1. (Central hub) **Stronghold**: Seat of government
2. **Special**: Unusual gravity
3. **Hazard**: Permanent fog
4. **Ruins**: Abandoned settlement
5. **Landmark**: Glimmering cave 
6. **Special**: Trash heap
7. **Lair**: Faction hideout
8. **Settlement**: Prison, factionally divided
9. **Special**: Home of the folk witches
10. **Lair**: Faction hideout
11. **Lair**: Hidden burrow

### Names
1. **Hope Landing**
2. **The Drifting Wood**
3. **The Murk**
4. **Dead Margin**
5. **Swift Mines**
6. **Slag Harbor**
7. **Lord's Blanket**
8. **Whisperbox Isle**
9. **Hexmire**
10. **Fria's Promise**
11. **The Skunkholes**

## Province: Whitefort
**Whitefort**, after its "founding" by the great ancestor of the **Earl of White**. The (now dead) locals referred to it as **The Ramparts**, but that name is long forgotten. The **Heart** of the **Province** is **Hope Landing**. Built around a large font of water in an otherwise brackish land, and originally acted as a hub for future explorers and pioneers travelling throughout the region. After years of stymied exploration in the wastelands to the West, folks eventually settled in the capital city. The current ruling Faction (The **Potentate**) makes the city its center of government, while **The Will** hides in the abandoned town of **Dead Margin** on the cliffs to the Southwest.

## Factions

### The Potentate (Government)
#### Resources
- **Base**: **Hope's Landing**. 
- **Anonymity**: The ruling council speaks only through an anointed subject, **The Whisper**.  
- **Knowledge**: There is little the **Potentate**'s ubiquitous spies do not know.   
- **Authority**: As the ruling faction over the **Province**, _detachments_ of soldiers can be summoned from the villages very quickly.
- **Seneschals**: **The Whisper**, stats as [banshee](/resources/monsters/banshee/), and **Lord Alexey**, stas as [buccaneer](/resources/monsters/buccaneer/).
- **Agenda**: Maintain the stability of the realm by crushing rising threats from other factions. 
  - Deploy newly-garrisoned troops to all roads leading into the Capital, to uncover enemies of the realm through torture and force. 
  - Crush the **The Will** and any other enemies threatening the realm. 

### Earl of White (Noble)
#### Resources
- **Base**: **Hope's Landing**. 
- **Fealty** of the plains villages and their farms (as detachment, stats as [Bandits](/resources/monsters/bandit/)).
- **Property**: The **White** family has control of significant food stores.
- **Seneschal**: Personal Chamberlain, stats as [Brigand](/resources/monsters/brigand/).
- **Agenda**: Increase his own wealth by eliminating this greatest competitor: **Lord Alexy**. 
  - Promise this season's crop-yield to the **Under-folk**. In exchange they will raid nearby villages.
  - Bait & assassinate **Lord Alexey**, whose family owns the **Swift Mines**.   
  - Marry the widow **Alexey** and inherit the mines, or buy them at a steep discount.

### The Under-folk (Commoner)
#### Resources
- **Base**: The caverns at **The Skunkholes**.
- **Population**: 2d10+10 ratlike **Under-folk**, stats as [Kobold](/resources/monsters/kobold/).
- **Apparatus**: The **God-thumb**, which provides warmth and safety for the colony. 
- **Seneschal**: **Ka-ro**, stats as [Ettin](/resources/monsters/ettin/).
- **Agenda**: Protect the **God-thumb** at all costs, and find new sources of food for the coming winter. 
  - Ally with the **Earl of White** for his food stores, so long as it is convenient.
  - Find an independent food store that they may control.

### The Will (Arcane)
#### Resources
- **Base**: **Dead Margin** (see below). Remnants in **Fria's Promise**.
- **Population**: 2d10+10 [Acolytes](/resources/monsters/acolyte).
- **Position**: **The Springhouse**, an abandoned keep in **Dead Margin**, once used by ancestors of the **Earl of White** to imprison and torture their political enemies. It is well-fortified and contains a small complex of jails beneath it. 
- **Seneschal**: **Arjen Vol Sonn**, stats as [Lich](/resources/monsters/lich/).
- **Agenda**: Acquire the **God-thumb**, and use it to restore **Fria The Empty**, then rule the **Provinces**.
  - Send spies throughout the **Provinces** in search of the **God-thumb**. Steal it. 
  - Command the **Under-folk** to overwhelm the capital and distract the **Potentate**.
  - Take the **God-thumb** to **Hexmire** and bathe it in the **Font of Regret**.  
 
## Map Result
[![Alt text](/img/2e/example-setting-2.png "Click to embiggen"){:height="40%" width="40%"}](/img/2e/example-setting-2.png)
