wip/2e/setting-seeds.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Setting Seeds
grand_parent: WIP
parent: 2e
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# Setting Seeds

## Overview

The following procedure is designed to help create the _seed_ of a setting: the geography, people, and paths that an adventuring party may have to navigate as they travel throughout a region. We'll start by drawing a map of the region, noting its unique topography, natural features, towns, lairs, dungeons, roads, and so on. Then we'll develop the people of the region, their ambitions and resources, and the factions that rule them.

## Materials Required
- At least one sheet of paper. Letter/A4 is OK, but the larger the better.
- Pencils and erasers.
- At least one d6 and one d20, but 6d6 and 2d20 would be ideal.

## Draw the Map

- Draw the letter **H** anywhere on a sheet of paper, or roll a d6 and mark where it lands. This is the region's **Heart**, or primary settlement. 
  - Roll 6d6 on the page, ignoring any dice that roll off the page. These are the maps's **Points of Interest** (POI).
  - Note the face up results according to the [Die Drop Table](#die-drop-table), writing its corresponding letter on the page beneath (e.g. R = Waypoint, D = Dungeon, etc.).
- Draw circles around the POIs (including the Heart) in clumps of 2-4 each, large enough to share borders. These represent the map's regions.
- Roll on the [Regions](#regions) table for each clump, and write the results on on the page.
- Roll on the relevant tables for each POI (including the Heart) and note the results.

> - The **Heart** is always a **Settlement** of some kind. It isn't necessarily the largest or most important place in the setting, but it should be significant to the region's history
> - Regions are swaths of land defined by either a particular terrain (e.g. tundra, hills, etc.), arbitrary political boundaries (a kingdom, a barony, etc.), or both.

### Points of Interest

Points of Interest on a map (or POIs) are generally divided into the following categories:  
- **Settlements**: Permanent, largely self-sufficient population centers, typically governed by a political body or faction.
- **Waypoints**: A safe place to refill supplies, get a good night's sleep, or get directions. Often rely on travelers for survival, but provide necessary services.
- **Curiosities**: A wilderness locale of note, somewhere remarkable or strange. It may indeed be hazardous, but only if the PCs interact with it.
- **Lairs**: A source of heightened monster activity, enemy encampment, or hive.
- **Dungeons**: An explicitly dangerous locale, dungeon, or adventure site.

> Some POIs may allow the PCs to see more of the world than what appears on their map.

### Die Drop Table

|         |                        |
| ------- | ---------------------- |
| **d6**  | **POI**                |
| **1**   | Waypoint or Settlement |
| **2-3** | Curiosity              |
| **4**   | Lair                   |
| **5-6** | Dungeon                |

### Regions

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |             |                   |
| ------- | ----------- | ----------------- |
| **d20** | **Terrain** | **Feature**       |
| **1**   | Canyons     | Natural Bridges   |
| **2**   | Caverns     | Acid Rain         |
| **3**   | Cliffs      | Sinkholes         |
| **4**   | Deserts     | Crystal Growths   |
| **5**   | Forests     | Salt Flats        |
| **6**   | Hills       | Dense Fog         |
| **7**   | Hollows     | Volcanoes         |
| **8**   | Jungles     | Drought           |
| **9**   | Lakes       | Wildfires         |
| **10**  | Mountains   | Dust Storms       |
| **11**  | Oasis       | Glacial Melt      |
| **12**  | Plateaus    | Ice Caves         |
| **13**  | Plains      | Geysers           |
| **14**  | Rivers      | Lava Fields       |
| **15**  | Sea         | Poisonous Foliage |
| **16**  | Swamps      | Toxic Water       |
| **17**  | Thickets    | Venomous Insects  |
| **18**  | Tundra      | Weak Ground       |
| **19**  | Valley      | Mudflats          |
| **20**  | Wasteland   | Earthquakes       |

### Settlements

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                 |                               |
| ------- | --------------- | ----------------------------- |
| **d20** | **Settlements** | **Feature**                   |
| **1**   | Academy         | Built Atop Ruins              |
| **2**   | Caravan         | Center of Learning            |
| **3**   | Citadel         | Close-knit                    |
| **4**   | City            | Divided                       |
| **5**   | Commune         | Emits a Mysterious Hum        |
| **6**   | Compound        | Famous for its Festivals      |
| **7**   | Convent         | Guarded by Trained Beasts     |
| **8**   | Farmstead       | High Population Density       |
| **9**   | Fortress        | Impregnable                   |
| **10**  | Garrison        | Integrated with Nature        |
| **11**  | Hamlet          | Hides a Dangerous Portal      |
| **12**  | Keep            | Known for its Hospitality     |
| **13**  | Monastery       | Location of a Legendary Forge |
| **14**  | Outpost         | Moves or Revolves             |
| **15**  | Plantation      | Protected by a Great Warrior  |
| **16**  | Prison          | Famous for its Artisans       |
| **17**  | Stronghold      | Built on Bones of Giants      |
| **18**  | Town            | Ruled by a Powerful Faction   |
| **19**  | Villa           | Steeped in Tradition          |
| **20**  | Village         | Trading Hub                   |

### Waypoints

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |                                  |
| ------- | ------------- | -------------------------------- |
| **d20** | **Waypoints** | **Feature**                      |
| **1**   | Archive       | Built on Sacred Grounds          |
| **2**   | Asylum        | Decrepit Buildings               |
| **3**   | Bazaar        | Reclusive Occupants              |
| **4**   | Beacon Tower  | Protects a Powerful Object       |
| **5**   | Bunker        | Cursed By Previous Occupants     |
| **6**   | Cabin         | Known for its Elaborate Defenses |
| **7**   | Campground    | Occupants are Lawful to a Fault  |
| **8**   | Guildhall     | Part of an Illegal Trade Route   |
| **9**   | Hospice       | Ruled by a Powerful Faction      |
| **10**  | Hunting Lodge | Host to a Renowned Artisan       |
| **11**  | Inn           | Distrustful Occupants            |
| **12**  | Observatory   | Technologically Advanced         |
| **13**  | Reservoir     | Contains a Powerful Artifact     |
| **14**  | Sanatorium    | Sits on Natural Deposits         |
| **15**  | Sanctuary     | Front for Illegal Operations     |
| **16**  | Shrine        | Popular Pilgrim Destination      |
| **17**  | Temple        | Occupants are Overly Formal      |
| **18**  | Trading Post  | A Haven for Outcasts             |
| **19**  | Watchtower    | Does Not Appear On Any Map       |
| **20**  | Work Camp     | Outsiders Cannot Carry Weapons   |

### Curiosities

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                    |                        |
| ------- | ------------------ | ---------------------- |
| **d20** | **Curiosities**    | **Feature**            |
| **1**   | Ancient Tree       | Buried Library         |
| **2**   | Enormous Footprint | Site of Ancient Battle |
| **3**   | Collapsed Mill     | Edible Fungus          |
| **4**   | Cracked Bell       | Carnivorous Plants     |
| **5**   | Singing Stones     | Cult Ritual Site       |
| **6**   | Leviathan Skeleton | Impossible Music       |
| **7**   | Purple Geysers     | Unstable Ground        |
| **8**   | Dripping Archway   | Perpetual Mist         |
| **9**   | Floating Island    | Infested With Vermin   |
| **10**  | Buried Megalith    | Buried Ley Line        |
| **11**  | Oddly-shaped Lake  | Illusory               |
| **12**  | Petrified Trees    | Irregular Gravity      |
| **13**  | Hanging Bridges    | Only Appears At Night  |
| **14**  | Crystal Spire      | Hidden Market          |
| **15**  | Echoing Fields     | Celestial Mirror       |
| **16**  | Enormous Fist      | Abandoned Vessel       |
| **17**  | Illegible Signpost | Ancient Trash Heap     |
| **18**  | Frozen Graveyard   | Perpetual Shadows      |
| **19**  | Sunken City        | Isolated Weather       |
| **20**  | Broken Tower       | Floating Debris        |

### Lairs

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                     |                     |
| ------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| **d20** | **Lair**            | **Feature**         |
| **1**   | Ancient prison      | Underwater          |
| **2**   | Unruly Copse        | Entry Forbidden     |
| **3**   | Dry Aqueduct        | Signs Posted        |
| **4**   | Colossal Hive       | Waste Pit           |
| **5**   | Crumbling Fort      | Piles of Bones      |
| **6**   | Crashed Ship        | Previously Occupied |
| **7**   | Spiked Cave         | Constant Screaming  |
| **8**   | Hollow Obelisk      | At Crossroads       |
| **9**   | Forgotten Graveyard | Religious Graffiti  |
| **10**  | Hidden Burrow       | Bioluminescence     |
| **11**  | Collapsed Mine      | Something Sleeps    |
| **12**  | Enormous Stump      | Odd Machinery       |
| **13**  | Overgrown Garden    | Scattered Traps     |
| **14**  | Primeval Menhirs    | Scavengers Watch    |
| **15**  | Primitive Bridge    | Symbiotic Entity    |
| **16**  | Rotted Mill         | Hidden Exit         |
| **17**  | Rusted Construct    | Baited Entrance     |
| **18**  | Sunken Grotto       | Faction Hideout     |
| **19**  | Ruined Town         | Training Camp       |
| **20**  | Abandoned Tower     | Abandoned           |

### Dungeons

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                |              |
| ------- | -------------- | ------------ |
| **d20** | **Type**       | **Feature**  |
| **1**   | Crypt          | Abandoned    |
| **2**   | Prison         | Buried       |
| **3**   | Cave           | Burnt        |
| **4**   | Mine           | Clockwork    |
| **5**   | Den            | Collapsed    |
| **6**   | Stronghold     | Crumbling    |
| **7**   | Temple         | Crystalline  |
| **8**   | Laboratory     | Floating     |
| **9**   | Workshop       | Flooded      |
| **10**  | Great Hall     | Fungal       |
| **11**  | Burial Ground  | Inverted     |
| **12**  | Shrouded Grove | Isolated     |
| **13**  | Ruined City    | Mirrored     |
| **14**  | Estate         | Otherworldly |
| **15**  | Tower          | Overgrown    |
| **16**  | Manor          | Petrified    |
| **17**  | Outpost        | Remote       |
| **18**  | Fort           | Sealed       |
| **19**  | Palace         | Toxic        |
| **20**  | Tomb           | Warped       |

## Paths & Landmarks

**Paths** act as geographic connectors on the map, ranging from well-traveled roads to rough wilderness routes. Paths should provide compelling choices between POIs, who must weigh factors such as safety, speed, and travel difficulty. 

- **Standard** paths are obvious or well-trod routes between two POIs, represented by a thick line.
- **Hidden** paths do not appear on any known maps. Their discovery always requires some kind of cost. Represented by a dashed line.
- **Conditional** paths may be blocked, or requires specialized tools (boats, climbing gear, etc.) to cross. Others may even be impossible to navigate without a map or guide. Represented by a crossed line.
- **Landmarks** are unique, visible POIs that can also be used as geographic reference points: towers, mountains, tall buildings, and so on. They help orient travelers around the map, and can help to identify terrain, regions, settlements, and Curiosities from afar. Landmarks are _especially_ visible from areas with higher elevation or a clear viewpoint. Each path should have at least one visible landmark.

### Draw Paths & Add Landmarks

- On your map, create 1-4 paths between each location.
  - Add at least two Hidden Paths, represented by a dashed line.
  - Add at least two Conditional Paths, represented by a crossed line.
  - Create loops, branching paths, dead-ends, and shortcuts between POIs.
  - Some paths may be parts of a chain and tied to a particular terrain (mountain passes, rivers, etc.).
- Decide whether each path represents a road, a trail, or a wilderness route and add them to the map. 
  - Roll on the [Path Types](#path-types) tables and note the results. 
  - Each path should have a visible Landmark somewhere along the way.
- Determine the path distances and note the time on the page:
  - POIs a short distance apart take one Watch to traverse, a medium distance apart take two Watches, and a long distance apart take three Watches. 
  - For Trails add 1 more Watch, and for Wilderness routes add 2 additional Watches.
  - Each Watch is 8 hours long. Denote days between POIs wherever possible (typically two Watches and one rest per day).

### Path Types

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                   |                    |
| ------- | ----------------- | ------------------ |
| **d20** | **Traveled By**   | **Landmark**       |
| **1**   | Merchants         | Enormous Footprint |
| **2**   | Thieves           | Dead Aqueduct      |
| **3**   | Pilgrims          | Petrified Forest   |
| **4**   | Loggers           | Giant's Throne     |
| **5**   | Armies            | Great Face         |
| **6**   | Smugglers         | Fire Temple        |
| **7**   | Star Gazers       | Mirage Lake        |
| **8**   | Farmers           | Fallen Column      |
| **9**   | Cattle Drivers    | Broken Sundial     |
| **10**  | Miners            | Massive Hole       |
| **11**  | Nomads            | Heart Tree         |
| **12**  | Migratory Animals | Ancient Maze       |
| **13**  | Patrols           | Amber Den          |
| **14**  | Ancient Peoples   | Glittering Cascade |
| **15**  | Cattle Drivers    | Cloud Stairway     |
| **16**  | Day Laborers      | Silver Face        |
| **17**  | Settlers          | Great Waterwheel   |
| **18**  | Zealots           | Gate for Titans    |
| **19**  | Prospectors       | Golden Bridge      |
| **20**  | Rebels            | Crystal Spire      |


## People

- Roll on the [Culture](#culture) table, and record the results:
- Roll on the [Resources](#resources) table and record the results.
- Answer the following:
  - How do the people that live there perceive themselves, and how others perceive them?
  - What effects does the region's terrain have on the people that live there? 
  - What resources are in abundance, and what are scarce? 
  - How do these factors relate to the other aspects of the region, and how does it shape the people that live there?
  - What would draw someone there, and why would they stay? 

### Culture

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |                 |
| ------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| **d20** | **Character** | **Ambition**    |
| **1**   | Struggling    | Power           |
| **2**   | Wealthy       | Conquest        |
| **3**   | Religious     | Stability       |
| **4**   | Hardy         | Peace           |
| **5**   | Reclusive     | Independence    |
| **6**   | Xenophobic    | Control         |
| **7**   | Traditional   | Purity          |
| **8**   | War-like      | Unification     |
| **9**   | Enlightened   | Knowledge       |
| **10**  | Artistic      | Division        |
| **11**  | Nomadic       | Exploration     |
| **12**  | Scholarly     | Bounty          |
| **13**  | Mercantile    | Wealth          |
| **14**  | Devious       | Dominance       |
| **15**  | Stoic         | Security        |
| **16**  | Harmonious    | Fealty          |
| **17**  | Inventive     | Recognition     |
| **18**  | Altruistic    | Natural Harmony |
| **19**  | Curious       | Conversion      |
| **20**  | Resilient     | Return          |

### Resources

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |               |
| ------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| **d20** | **Abundance** | **Scarcity**  |
| **1**   | Vessels       | Water         |
| **2**   | Skilled Labor | Food          |
| **3**   | Tools         | Knowledge     |
| **4**   | Fuel          | Land          |
| **5**   | Medicine      | Trade Goods   |
| **6**   | Land          | Spices        |
| **7**   | Knowledge     | Textiles      |
| **8**   | Herbs         | Livestock     |
| **9**   | Wood          | Herbs         |
| **10**  | Food          | Weapons       |
| **11**  | Stone         | Gemstones     |
| **12**  | Gemstones     | Ore           |
| **13**  | Ore           | Stone         |
| **14**  | Water         | Horses        |
| **15**  | Trade Goods   | Wood          |
| **16**  | Spices        | Medicine      |
| **17**  | Livestock     | Skilled Labor |
| **18**  | Horses        | Tools         |
| **19**  | Textiles      | Vessels       |
| **20**  | Weapons       | Fuel          |

## Conclusion

Once you've gathered the results of these tables, combine them in order to create a cohesive theme for this region. For example, if I rolled a region covered in plains and surrounded by rivers, I might assume that the locals here were tradespeople, selling their wares to the neighbors downriver. If I rolled that the people there were religious and sought conversion, I'd assume they were a proud folk, but prone to religious extremes and proselytizing. And if their primary resources were land, I'd assume they grew their own food, but that their traders were always on the search for spices from distant lands.

Commit message:

added some words about people

wip/2e/setting-seeds.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Setting Seeds
grand_parent: WIP
parent: 2e
nav_exclude: true
search_exclude: true
---

# Setting Seeds

## Overview

The following procedure is designed to help create the _seed_ of a setting: the geography, people, and paths that an adventuring party may have to navigate as they travel throughout a region. We'll start by drawing a map of the region, noting its unique topography, natural features, towns, lairs, dungeons, roads, and so on. Then we'll develop the people of the region, their ambitions and resources, and the factions that rule them.

## Materials Required
- At least one sheet of paper. Letter/A4 is OK, but the larger the better.
- Pencils and erasers.
- At least one d6 and one d20, but 6d6 and 2d20 would be ideal.

## Draw the Map

- Draw the letter **H** anywhere on a sheet of paper, or roll a d6 and mark where it lands. This is the region's **Heart**, or primary settlement. 
  - Roll 6d6 on the page, ignoring any dice that roll off the page. These are the maps's **Points of Interest** (POI).
  - Note the face up results according to the [Die Drop Table](#die-drop-table), writing its corresponding letter on the page beneath (e.g. R = Waypoint, D = Dungeon, etc.).
- Draw circles around the POIs (including the Heart) in clumps of 2-4 each, large enough to share borders. These represent the map's regions.
- Roll on the [Regions](#regions) table for each clump, and write the results on on the page.
- Roll on the relevant tables for each POI (including the Heart) and note the results.

> - The **Heart** is always a **Settlement** of some kind. It isn't necessarily the largest or most important place in the setting, but it should be significant to the region's history
> - Regions are swaths of land defined by either a particular terrain (e.g. tundra, hills, etc.), arbitrary political boundaries (a kingdom, a barony, etc.), or both.

### Points of Interest

Points of Interest on a map (or POIs) are generally divided into the following categories:  
- **Settlements**: Permanent, largely self-sufficient population centers, typically governed by a political body or faction.
- **Waypoints**: A safe place to refill supplies, get a good night's sleep, or get directions. Often rely on travelers for survival, but provide necessary services.
- **Curiosities**: A wilderness locale of note, somewhere remarkable or strange. It may indeed be hazardous, but only if the PCs interact with it.
- **Lairs**: A source of heightened monster activity, enemy encampment, or hive.
- **Dungeons**: An explicitly dangerous locale, dungeon, or adventure site.

> Some POIs may allow the PCs to see more of the world than what appears on their map.

### Die Drop Table

|         |                        |
| ------- | ---------------------- |
| **d6**  | **POI**                |
| **1**   | Waypoint or Settlement |
| **2-3** | Curiosity              |
| **4**   | Lair                   |
| **5-6** | Dungeon                |

### Regions

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |             |                   |
| ------- | ----------- | ----------------- |
| **d20** | **Terrain** | **Feature**       |
| **1**   | Canyons     | Natural Bridges   |
| **2**   | Caverns     | Acid Rain         |
| **3**   | Cliffs      | Sinkholes         |
| **4**   | Deserts     | Crystal Growths   |
| **5**   | Forests     | Salt Flats        |
| **6**   | Hills       | Dense Fog         |
| **7**   | Hollows     | Volcanoes         |
| **8**   | Jungles     | Drought           |
| **9**   | Lakes       | Wildfires         |
| **10**  | Mountains   | Dust Storms       |
| **11**  | Oasis       | Glacial Melt      |
| **12**  | Plateaus    | Ice Caves         |
| **13**  | Plains      | Geysers           |
| **14**  | Rivers      | Lava Fields       |
| **15**  | Sea         | Poisonous Foliage |
| **16**  | Swamps      | Toxic Water       |
| **17**  | Thickets    | Venomous Insects  |
| **18**  | Tundra      | Weak Ground       |
| **19**  | Valley      | Mudflats          |
| **20**  | Wasteland   | Earthquakes       |

### Settlements

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                 |                               |
| ------- | --------------- | ----------------------------- |
| **d20** | **Settlements** | **Feature**                   |
| **1**   | Academy         | Built Atop Ruins              |
| **2**   | Caravan         | Center of Learning            |
| **3**   | Citadel         | Close-knit                    |
| **4**   | City            | Divided                       |
| **5**   | Commune         | Emits a Mysterious Hum        |
| **6**   | Compound        | Famous for its Festivals      |
| **7**   | Convent         | Guarded by Trained Beasts     |
| **8**   | Farmstead       | High Population Density       |
| **9**   | Fortress        | Impregnable                   |
| **10**  | Garrison        | Integrated with Nature        |
| **11**  | Hamlet          | Hides a Dangerous Portal      |
| **12**  | Keep            | Known for its Hospitality     |
| **13**  | Monastery       | Location of a Legendary Forge |
| **14**  | Outpost         | Moves or Revolves             |
| **15**  | Plantation      | Protected by a Great Warrior  |
| **16**  | Prison          | Famous for its Artisans       |
| **17**  | Stronghold      | Built on Bones of Giants      |
| **18**  | Town            | Ruled by a Powerful Faction   |
| **19**  | Villa           | Steeped in Tradition          |
| **20**  | Village         | Trading Hub                   |

### Waypoints

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |                                  |
| ------- | ------------- | -------------------------------- |
| **d20** | **Waypoints** | **Feature**                      |
| **1**   | Archive       | Built on Sacred Grounds          |
| **2**   | Asylum        | Decrepit Buildings               |
| **3**   | Bazaar        | Reclusive Occupants              |
| **4**   | Beacon Tower  | Protects a Powerful Object       |
| **5**   | Bunker        | Cursed By Previous Occupants     |
| **6**   | Cabin         | Known for its Elaborate Defenses |
| **7**   | Campground    | Occupants are Lawful to a Fault  |
| **8**   | Guildhall     | Part of an Illegal Trade Route   |
| **9**   | Hospice       | Ruled by a Powerful Faction      |
| **10**  | Hunting Lodge | Host to a Renowned Artisan       |
| **11**  | Inn           | Distrustful Occupants            |
| **12**  | Observatory   | Technologically Advanced         |
| **13**  | Reservoir     | Contains a Powerful Artifact     |
| **14**  | Sanatorium    | Sits on Natural Deposits         |
| **15**  | Sanctuary     | Front for Illegal Operations     |
| **16**  | Shrine        | Popular Pilgrim Destination      |
| **17**  | Temple        | Occupants are Overly Formal      |
| **18**  | Trading Post  | A Haven for Outcasts             |
| **19**  | Watchtower    | Does Not Appear On Any Map       |
| **20**  | Work Camp     | Outsiders Cannot Carry Weapons   |

### Curiosities

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                    |                        |
| ------- | ------------------ | ---------------------- |
| **d20** | **Curiosities**    | **Feature**            |
| **1**   | Ancient Tree       | Buried Library         |
| **2**   | Enormous Footprint | Site of Ancient Battle |
| **3**   | Collapsed Mill     | Edible Fungus          |
| **4**   | Cracked Bell       | Carnivorous Plants     |
| **5**   | Singing Stones     | Cult Ritual Site       |
| **6**   | Leviathan Skeleton | Impossible Music       |
| **7**   | Purple Geysers     | Unstable Ground        |
| **8**   | Dripping Archway   | Perpetual Mist         |
| **9**   | Floating Island    | Infested With Vermin   |
| **10**  | Buried Megalith    | Buried Ley Line        |
| **11**  | Oddly-shaped Lake  | Illusory               |
| **12**  | Petrified Trees    | Irregular Gravity      |
| **13**  | Hanging Bridges    | Only Appears At Night  |
| **14**  | Crystal Spire      | Hidden Market          |
| **15**  | Echoing Fields     | Celestial Mirror       |
| **16**  | Enormous Fist      | Abandoned Vessel       |
| **17**  | Illegible Signpost | Ancient Trash Heap     |
| **18**  | Frozen Graveyard   | Perpetual Shadows      |
| **19**  | Sunken City        | Isolated Weather       |
| **20**  | Broken Tower       | Floating Debris        |

### Lairs

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                     |                     |
| ------- | ------------------- | ------------------- |
| **d20** | **Lair**            | **Feature**         |
| **1**   | Ancient prison      | Underwater          |
| **2**   | Unruly Copse        | Entry Forbidden     |
| **3**   | Dry Aqueduct        | Signs Posted        |
| **4**   | Colossal Hive       | Waste Pit           |
| **5**   | Crumbling Fort      | Piles of Bones      |
| **6**   | Crashed Ship        | Previously Occupied |
| **7**   | Spiked Cave         | Constant Screaming  |
| **8**   | Hollow Obelisk      | At Crossroads       |
| **9**   | Forgotten Graveyard | Religious Graffiti  |
| **10**  | Hidden Burrow       | Bioluminescence     |
| **11**  | Collapsed Mine      | Something Sleeps    |
| **12**  | Enormous Stump      | Odd Machinery       |
| **13**  | Overgrown Garden    | Scattered Traps     |
| **14**  | Primeval Menhirs    | Scavengers Watch    |
| **15**  | Primitive Bridge    | Symbiotic Entity    |
| **16**  | Rotted Mill         | Hidden Exit         |
| **17**  | Rusted Construct    | Baited Entrance     |
| **18**  | Sunken Grotto       | Faction Hideout     |
| **19**  | Ruined Town         | Training Camp       |
| **20**  | Abandoned Tower     | Abandoned           |

### Dungeons

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                |              |
| ------- | -------------- | ------------ |
| **d20** | **Type**       | **Feature**  |
| **1**   | Crypt          | Abandoned    |
| **2**   | Prison         | Buried       |
| **3**   | Cave           | Burnt        |
| **4**   | Mine           | Clockwork    |
| **5**   | Den            | Collapsed    |
| **6**   | Stronghold     | Crumbling    |
| **7**   | Temple         | Crystalline  |
| **8**   | Laboratory     | Floating     |
| **9**   | Workshop       | Flooded      |
| **10**  | Great Hall     | Fungal       |
| **11**  | Burial Ground  | Inverted     |
| **12**  | Shrouded Grove | Isolated     |
| **13**  | Ruined City    | Mirrored     |
| **14**  | Estate         | Otherworldly |
| **15**  | Tower          | Overgrown    |
| **16**  | Manor          | Petrified    |
| **17**  | Outpost        | Remote       |
| **18**  | Fort           | Sealed       |
| **19**  | Palace         | Toxic        |
| **20**  | Tomb           | Warped       |

## Paths & Landmarks

**Paths** act as geographic connectors on the map, ranging from well-traveled roads to rough wilderness routes. Paths should provide compelling choices between POIs, who must weigh factors such as safety, speed, and travel difficulty. 

- **Standard** paths are obvious or well-trod routes between two POIs, represented by a thick line.
- **Hidden** paths do not appear on any known maps. Their discovery always requires some kind of cost. Represented by a dashed line.
- **Conditional** paths may be blocked, or requires specialized tools (boats, climbing gear, etc.) to cross. Others may even be impossible to navigate without a map or guide. Represented by a crossed line.
- **Landmarks** are unique, visible POIs that can also be used as geographic reference points: towers, mountains, tall buildings, and so on. They help orient travelers around the map, and can help to identify terrain, regions, settlements, and curiosities from afar. Landmarks are _especially_ visible from areas with higher elevation or a clear viewpoint. Each path should have at least one visible landmark, represented by a triangle drawn somewhere along the path.

### Draw Paths & Add Landmarks

- On your map, create 1-4 paths between each location.
  - Add at least two Hidden Paths, represented by a dashed line.
  - Add at least two Conditional Paths, represented by a crossed line.
  - Create loops, branching paths, dead-ends, and shortcuts between POIs.
  - Some paths may be parts of a chain and tied to a particular terrain (mountain passes, rivers, etc.).
- Decide whether each path represents a road, a trail, or a wilderness route and add them to the map. 
  - Roll on the [Path Types](#path-types) tables and note the results. 
  - Each path should have a visible Landmark somewhere along the way.
- Determine the path distances and note the time on the page:
  - POIs a short distance apart take one Watch to traverse, a medium distance apart take two Watches, and a long distance apart take three Watches. 
  - For Trails add 1 more Watch, and for Wilderness routes add 2 additional Watches.
  - Each Watch is 8 hours long. Denote days between POIs wherever possible (typically two Watches and one rest per day).

### Path Types

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |                   |                    |
| ------- | ----------------- | ------------------ |
| **d20** | **Traveled By**   | **Landmark**       |
| **1**   | Merchants         | Enormous Footprint |
| **2**   | Thieves           | Dead Aqueduct      |
| **3**   | Pilgrims          | Petrified Forest   |
| **4**   | Loggers           | Giant's Throne     |
| **5**   | Armies            | Great Face         |
| **6**   | Smugglers         | Fire Temple        |
| **7**   | Star Gazers       | Mirage Lake        |
| **8**   | Farmers           | Fallen Column      |
| **9**   | Cattle Drivers    | Broken Sundial     |
| **10**  | Miners            | Massive Hole       |
| **11**  | Nomads            | Heart Tree         |
| **12**  | Migratory Animals | Ancient Maze       |
| **13**  | Patrols           | Amber Den          |
| **14**  | Ancient Peoples   | Glittering Cascade |
| **15**  | Cattle Drivers    | Cloud Stairway     |
| **16**  | Day Laborers      | Silver Face        |
| **17**  | Settlers          | Great Waterwheel   |
| **18**  | Zealots           | Gate for Titans    |
| **19**  | Prospectors       | Golden Bridge      |
| **20**  | Rebels            | Crystal Spire      |

## People

The most important aspect of a setting are its _people_. But they are shaped by the terrain and history of their region, which is why we generate their character, ambitions, and resources at the very end. 

- Roll on the [Culture](#culture) and [Resources](#resources) tables for every region that has a settlement. and record the results. Then answer the following:
  - How do the people that live there perceive themselves, and how others perceive them?
  - What effects does the region's terrain have on the people that live there? 
  - What resources are in abundance, and what are scarce? 
  - How do these factors relate to the other aspects of the region, and how does it shape the people that live there?
  - What would draw someone there, and why would they stay? 

### Culture

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |                 |
| ------- | ------------- | --------------- |
| **d20** | **Character** | **Ambition**    |
| **1**   | Struggling    | Power           |
| **2**   | Wealthy       | Conquest        |
| **3**   | Religious     | Stability       |
| **4**   | Hardy         | Peace           |
| **5**   | Reclusive     | Independence    |
| **6**   | Xenophobic    | Control         |
| **7**   | Traditional   | Purity          |
| **8**   | War-like      | Unification     |
| **9**   | Enlightened   | Knowledge       |
| **10**  | Artistic      | Division        |
| **11**  | Nomadic       | Exploration     |
| **12**  | Scholarly     | Bounty          |
| **13**  | Mercantile    | Wealth          |
| **14**  | Devious       | Dominance       |
| **15**  | Stoic         | Security        |
| **16**  | Harmonious    | Fealty          |
| **17**  | Inventive     | Recognition     |
| **18**  | Altruistic    | Natural Harmony |
| **19**  | Curious       | Conversion      |
| **20**  | Resilient     | Return          |

### Resources

Roll 2d20 and combine the results.

|         |               |               |
| ------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| **d20** | **Abundance** | **Scarcity**  |
| **1**   | Vessels       | Water         |
| **2**   | Skilled Labor | Food          |
| **3**   | Tools         | Knowledge     |
| **4**   | Fuel          | Land          |
| **5**   | Medicine      | Trade Goods   |
| **6**   | Land          | Spices        |
| **7**   | Knowledge     | Textiles      |
| **8**   | Herbs         | Livestock     |
| **9**   | Wood          | Herbs         |
| **10**  | Food          | Weapons       |
| **11**  | Stone         | Gemstones     |
| **12**  | Gemstones     | Ore           |
| **13**  | Ore           | Stone         |
| **14**  | Water         | Horses        |
| **15**  | Trade Goods   | Wood          |
| **16**  | Spices        | Medicine      |
| **17**  | Livestock     | Skilled Labor |
| **18**  | Horses        | Tools         |
| **19**  | Textiles      | Vessels       |
| **20**  | Weapons       | Fuel          |

## Conclusion

Once you've gathered the results of these tables, combine them in order to create a cohesive theme for this region. For example, if I rolled a region covered in plains and surrounded by rivers, I might assume that the locals here were tradespeople, selling their wares to the neighbors downriver. If I rolled that the people there were religious and sought conversion, I'd assume they were a proud folk, but prone to religious extremes and proselytizing. And if their primary resources were land, I'd assume they grew their own food, but that their traders were always on the search for spices from distant lands.

Next, you can follow the [Factions](/wip/2e/factions.md) rules for generating Factions to populate your map, and the [Dungeons] or [Forestcrawl](/wip/2e/forestcrawl.md) rules to build each of your POIs.
