resources/converting-monsters.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Converting Monsters
nav_order: 3
parent: Resources
---

# Converting Monsters

There is no perfect system for converting from other systems.  
Below are some tips that might help with the process!

## The Basics
Review the instructions in the [SRD](https://cairnrpg.com/cairn-srd/#creating-monsters). A couple of things to keep in mind:
- OSE (or B / X) has really great stat blocks to start with. Just ignore THAC0.
- Dungeon World has some great monster "moves" that translate to Critical Damage quite nicely, so looking for an equivalent creature in that system can really help! See this example [here](http://codex.dungeon-world.com/monster/5698559156420608).
- A good rule of thumb is that OSR 1 HD = 1 HP, keeping in mind that the minimum is 3 or 4 HP (Cairn). I usually think of HD as equivalent to a d6, which has a mean of 3.5.
- **Hit Protection** is _not_ health. It's the creature's ability to avoid danger, whether through toughness, speed, or skill.
- **Strength** is both health and physical power. Sometimes HP/HD from other systems is better represented in **STR** than in **Hit Protection**.
- **Willpower** is tricky. It rarely comes up but when it does, it's nice to have. High **WIL** is strong personality, spirit or presence.
- **Morale** (**ML**) can be a good guidepost for **Willpower** as well. Morale typically ranges between 2-12; some games use a "Morale Check" is used to determine if a monster flees (in Cairn a **WIL** save is used instead).  The referee rolls 2d6; if the result is higher than the monster's **ML** score, they flee. This means that a higher **ML** usually means a higher **WIL**.
- Attack **damage** is pretty straightforward coming from games like OSE (or B / X); you can usually just copy them as-is. Double-check with the [weapons table](/cairn-srd/#weapons) if unsure.
- Multiple attacks (e.g. 2 x claw, 1 x sting) typically convert to [_Blast_](/cairn-srd#Blast) and/or the "two weapons" rule (e.g. d6+d6 is roll 2d6, keep highest).
- When in doubt, think about how much serious damage the creature is supposed to do. Remember that instead of raising attack damage a step, think about making it _enhanced_ in certain situations or use the _Blast_ and "two weapons" rule.
- Spells are tricky; you can give wizardy-types Spellbooks but remember, the creature might _drop_ them when they are defeated. I like to make 1d4 dropped Spellbooks implode ([Die of Fate](/cairn-srd#die-of-fate)).
- Magical creatures can just "know" a bunch of spells. In this case make their corpse magical (and dangerous).
- Sometimes a direct stat to stat translation isn't an option. That's OK! There is a way (see below).

## Use The Fiction
Read the original stat block and surrounding commentary, then write a few sentences about the creature. Then convert what you've written to the Cairn monster stat block.

Take for example this OSR creature:

#### Foxwoman
Can take the form of a fox, a woman, or a 7' tall fox-headed.  
HD d8 HP HDx4 Speed 120' Armor 14 Morale 11 Attack: +4 d8hp (claw, bite or choke)
- Defense: Cannot be harmed by metal
- Special: Can transform into a fox or a maiden with one fox leg hidden (same stats) at will

_**Using the example above, I can see that she:**_  
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Looking at the stats, it seems like she doesn't have too high HP, and she's quite fast.
- Agile and lithe.
- Attacks with deadly teeth and claws (choking her prey if possible).
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to metal weapons.

_**What can we learn from this?**_  
- She's fast, and probably savvy in a fight. She probably has higher than average Hit Protection (regular humans have 3 HP). **6 HP**.
- I don't think foxes have protective hides, and she's otherwise human beside her head. **No Armor**.
- She is decently strong. Normal human is 10 and she's bigger. **12 STR**.
- I can imagine her hunting prey over the snowy tundra. She's fast. **14 DEX**.
- Foxes are pretty cunning, right? Probably forceful and proactive in a tough situation. **11 WIL**.
- I'd go with **bite (d6)** for the teeth attack, and **claws (d8+d8)**, the same as any two-handed weapon.

_**In summary, that leaves us with the following opening statblock:**_  
6 HP, 12 STR, 14 DEX, 11 WIL, teeth (d6), claws (d8+d8)

_**Now on to her abilities:**_  
This is pretty straightforward. We simply read the fictional stat block we created earlier!
- We know what she looks like, and that she can transform into a fox at will.
- She cannot be harmed by metal; I'm taking this to mean she's immune to _metal weapons_.
- She chokes her victims.

_**Easy, right? Now to make it useful:**_  
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to attacks from metal weapons.
- Critical damage: victim is choked unconscious, to be fed on soon after.

_**And that's it!**_
_**Behold, a converted Cairn monster:**_

#### Foxwoman
6 HP, 12 STR, 14 DEX, 11 WIL, teeth (d6), claws (d8+d8)
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to attacks from metal weapons.
- Critical damage: victim is choked unconscious, to be fed on soon after.

Commit message:

added more bits about STR

resources/converting-monsters.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Converting Monsters
nav_order: 3
parent: Resources
---

# Converting Monsters

There is no perfect system for converting from other systems.  
Below are some tips that might help with the process!

## The Basics
Review the instructions in the [SRD](https://cairnrpg.com/cairn-srd/#creating-monsters). A couple of things to keep in mind:
- OSE (or B / X) has really great stat blocks to start with. Just ignore THAC0.
- Dungeon World has some great monster "moves" that translate to Critical Damage quite nicely, so looking for an equivalent creature in that system can really help! See this example [here](http://codex.dungeon-world.com/monster/5698559156420608).
- A good rule of thumb is that OSR 1 HD = 1 HP, keeping in mind that the minimum is 4 HP (Cairn). I usually think of HD as equivalent to a d6, which has a mean of 3.5. HP in Cairn _does_ translate reliably, but remember it does not convert to **STR** as easily!
- **Hit Protection** is _not_ health. It's the creature's ability to avoid danger, whether through toughness, speed, or skill.
- **Strength** is both health and physical power. Sometimes HP/HD from other systems is better represented in **STR** than in **Hit Protection**. If a creature is difficult to kill in an OSR system but _not_ because they are good at combat, give them more **STR**. 
- **Willpower** is tricky. It rarely comes up but when it does, it's nice to have. High **WIL** is strong personality, spirit or presence.
- **Morale** (**ML**) can be a good guidepost for **Willpower** as well. Morale typically ranges between 2-12; some games use a "Morale Check" is used to determine if a monster flees (in Cairn a **WIL** save is used instead).  The referee rolls 2d6; if the result is higher than the monster's **ML** score, they flee. This means that a higher **ML** usually means a higher **WIL**.
- Attack **damage** is pretty straightforward coming from games like OSE (or B / X); you can usually just copy them as-is. Double-check with the [weapons table](/cairn-srd/#weapons) if unsure.
- Multiple attacks (e.g. 2 x claw, 1 x sting) typically convert to [_Blast_](/cairn-srd#Blast) and/or the "two weapons" rule (e.g. d6+d6 is roll 2d6, keep highest).
- When in doubt, think about how much serious damage the creature is supposed to do. Remember that instead of raising attack damage a step, think about making it _enhanced_ in certain situations or use the _Blast_ and "two weapons" rule.
- Spells are tricky; you can give wizardy-types Spellbooks but remember, the creature might _drop_ them when they are defeated. I like to make 1d4 dropped Spellbooks implode ([Die of Fate](/cairn-srd#die-of-fate)).
- Magical creatures can just "know" a bunch of spells. In this case make their corpse magical (and dangerous).
- Sometimes a direct stat to stat translation isn't an option. That's OK! There is a way (see below).

## Use The Fiction
Read the original stat block and surrounding commentary, then write a few sentences about the creature. Then convert what you've written to the Cairn monster stat block.

Take for example this OSR creature:

#### Foxwoman
Can take the form of a fox, a woman, or a 7' tall fox-headed.  
HD d8 HP HDx4 Speed 120' Armor 14 Morale 11 Attack: +4 d8hp (claw, bite or choke)
- Defense: Cannot be harmed by metal
- Special: Can transform into a fox or a maiden with one fox leg hidden (same stats) at will

_**Using the example above, I can see that she:**_  
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Looking at the stats, it seems like she doesn't have too high HP, and she's quite fast.
- Agile and lithe.
- Attacks with deadly teeth and claws (choking her prey if possible).
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to metal weapons.

_**What can we learn from this?**_  
- She's fast, and probably savvy in a fight. She probably has higher than average Hit Protection (regular humans have 3 HP). **6 HP**.
- I don't think foxes have protective hides, and she's otherwise human beside her head. **No Armor**.
- She is decently strong. Normal human is 10 and she's bigger. **12 STR**.
- I can imagine her hunting prey over the snowy tundra. She's fast. **14 DEX**.
- Foxes are pretty cunning, right? Probably forceful and proactive in a tough situation. **11 WIL**.
- I'd go with **bite (d6)** for the teeth attack, and **claws (d8+d8)**, the same as any two-handed weapon.

_**In summary, that leaves us with the following opening statblock:**_  
6 HP, 12 STR, 14 DEX, 11 WIL, teeth (d6), claws (d8+d8)

_**Now on to her abilities:**_  
This is pretty straightforward. We simply read the fictional stat block we created earlier!
- We know what she looks like, and that she can transform into a fox at will.
- She cannot be harmed by metal; I'm taking this to mean she's immune to _metal weapons_.
- She chokes her victims.

_**Easy, right? Now to make it useful:**_  
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to attacks from metal weapons.
- Critical damage: victim is choked unconscious, to be fed on soon after.

_**And that's it!**_
_**Behold, a converted Cairn monster:**_

#### Foxwoman
6 HP, 12 STR, 14 DEX, 11 WIL, teeth (d6), claws (d8+d8)
- Appears as a 7-foot tall with a human woman with the head of a fox.
- Transforms into a fox at will.
- Immune to attacks from metal weapons.
- Critical damage: victim is choked unconscious, to be fed on soon after.
